Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm here for a second time with Doctor
Bernard Bernard Regin, he's Professor of Philosophy at Brown
University. So in our previous interview, we talked about
his book, The Affirmation of Life Nietzsche on overcoming
nihilism. And I'm leaving a link to it in
the description box of this interview. And today we're
talking about another one of his books, uh The
Will To Nothingness, an essay on Nietzsche's on the
genealogy of morality. So, Doctor Regin, welcome back to
the show. It's always a pleasure to have everyone.
Thank you. The pleasure is mine, Ricardo.
So uh to start our conversation with um what
is basically the premise of on the genealogy of
morality by Nietzsche.
Well, the genus of moti is uh unlike most
of other niches, books in, in so far as
it seems to have a very determinate focus, which
is a uh a critical examination of uh Christian
morality as uh which is the uh uh the
moral look that started with Christianity. But that then
uh is the basic inspiration for uh the uh
the modern circular variants of it are in the
enlightenment, especially the morality of human rights. For example,
I mean, any a moral outlook that basically considers
that uh uh each and every human being possesses
an equal moral standing and as such is entitled
to basic respect and consideration. Um NOT despite its
tight focus and its uh its seeming systematic shape.
Uh The book is uh still uh created a
great deal of puzzlement. So, uh there's a Bernard
Williams for, for example, famously described it as a
book that uh on the one hand seems to
be hitting on something with great exactitude, but on
the other also remains infuriatingly vague. These are his
words. Um So the purpose of my book was
to try to uh understand uh what kind of
uh argument, uh especially critical argument Nietzsche develops against
Christian Mor. I mean, Nietzsche is famous for uh
attacking Christian morality for calling it into question. But
uh there's a, there remains a great deal of
controversy and puzzlement as to what exactly he finds
objectionable about it.
Uh And what does it mean to call the
genealogy of morality uh form of epistemic debunking. What
does that mean exactly?
Well, so the, the, the most, well, one of
the most puzzling aspects of Nietzsche's project in that
book is that he claims to be able to
derive normative conclusions about Christian morality from a historical
investigation into its origin and development, a genealogy of
it so to speak. And uh philosophers have long
puzzled over uh how that argument could work. I
mean, uh so people worried that Nietzsche was committing
a famous fallacy known as the genetic fallacy, which
is the idea that you could uh imper the
truth of a statement by looking at the way
the statements, the statement came about. Uh So obviously,
that's a fallacy. But uh philosophers have since then
reconsidered gene arguments and one of the most influential
forms uh that argument has been given is the
form of epistemic debunking. So the idea is that
uh you cannot show that the belief is false
by examining the way in which the belief came
about. But you can raise questions about whether the
agent who holds the belief, uh a belief that
is being formed in this particular way is actually
justified in holding the belief, that's what's known as
epistemic debunking. So if you find that we believe
as a certain kind of history that for example,
it came about through the operation of mechanisms and
processes that are not epistemic reliable, that are not
the kinds of things that usually track the truth
about the world. Then it gives you a reason
to reduce the confidence that you place in the
belief. So, so that's one form of uh this
one form of uh uh one way of interpreting
Genea arguments that has been attributed to Nietzsche. I
don't think uh as you know, I I don't
think ultimately, this is uh this is what Nietzsche
uh uh takes his critique of morality to consist
of. He doesn't simply try to show that uh
uh people who hold, who subscribe to Christian morality
in fact, are on thin epistemic grant when they
do so.
And when it comes to the approach Nietzsche uses
in this book to tackle the genealogy of morality.
Would you say it is a naturalistic one?
Well, it's naturalistic in the sense that he tries
to avoid any kind in his explanation of what
moral it is, how it came about and so
on and so forth. He tries to avoid any
kind of reference to factors that are not part
of nature, that are not the kinds of factors
that could be observed recorded documented by the natural
sciences where by natural sciences that includes what we
would call the social sciences like psychology, for example.
And so in that respect, his approach is in
fact naturalistic. So he gives an explanation of how
Mo came about that doesn't involve the operation of
entities such as God that doesn't involve our possession
of special properties like freedom of will, that doesn't
involve positing normative facts or entities that could not
be observed and known by the use of the
methods of natural sciences and so on and so
forth.
Mhm And what this functionality mean in the context
of morality. Well,
so the my approach to uh uh to the
genealogical explanation of uh of certain judgments is uh
uh differs from uh uh uh from the, the,
the, the, the epistemic approach that you mentioned earlier,
right? So, uh Nietzsche, so, so for the people
who hold the epistemic view niche is in the
business of calling into question whether our moral beliefs,
we have reasons to take our moral beliefs to
be true or not. But in fact, Nietzsche, on
a number of occasions, deny that what's important about
beliefs in general. But moral beliefs in particular is
whether or not they are true, as he famously
says, what's new about my approach is that whether
a judgment is true is not what's important, you
know, what is important in his view is uh
what it does to the individual who holds the
belief, to hold that belief, what kind of, what
kind of a functional benefit that person or the
group to which that person belongs by derive from
uh from holding that particular belief. So the issue,
when you look at the moral belief on each
a like, for example, it is good to help
the needy. The issue is not whether or not
the belief is true, whether it tracks certain normative
objective facts about uh the, the value or the
rightness of helping the needy. But the question is
whether uh it is useful for individuals to hold
and govern their lives by the light of such
beliefs. So that's what he means by, that's what
I mean by a functional approach. And so Nietzsche's
ultimate claim is that while more Christian moral beliefs
have a kind of uh functionality, that functionality is
somehow defective, that's the claim that I want to
make at the end of the day.
And all those Nietzsche uh approach moralities psychologically.
Well, so he famously says in, uh in, he
doesn't say so directly in the gene energy of
morality. But uh he says so in the book
that he wrote right before, which is Beyond Good
and evil. And then he says it again uh
in books that directly follow the general morality, such
as for example, the twilight of the idols, he
famously says that moralities in general are a sign
language of effects. Uh And there's a, there's a
of course, a big discussion in the scholarly tera
as to what exactly he means by this. Well,
the standard view is that Nietzsche simply is advocating
here a kind of sentimentalism about value and sentimentalism
about value is I mean, it, it, it has
several dimensions. But basically, it's the idea that uh
when I make a more judgment such as helping
the needy is right. Uh I express uh a
sentiment that I have towards uh neediness or towards
the act of helping the needy. So a sentiment
of aversion towards neediness and a sentiment of inclination
towards the act of helping the needy and relieving
them of their suffering. Uh So that's a standard
view now, uh I, you know, I I argue
and we cannot go into the detail because there
are some technical details involved here. But I argue
that this cannot possibly be by what uh what
Nietzsche has in mind when he says that moralities
are a sign language of the fact. Uh If
only because uh the effects that are supposed to
explain the moral judgments do not uh connect especially
in each particular examples uh with one another in
the way that they should, if he were just
an ordinary sentimentalist about uh about moral judgments, uh
by the way, that sentimentalist about moral judgment is
a view that was uh fairly well known, at
least in, in, in British philosophy from the uh
17th and 18th century. Uh And so, if, if
Nietzsche simply were borrowing their views, you would have
expected him to at least acknowledge as much, but
he doesn't. And it's because I think that the
connection that he thinks that he takes there to
be between more judgments and affect states is not
an expressive relation as it will have to be
in sentimentalism, but a functional relation. The idea being
that uh uh in his view, more judgments can
be understood in terms of the particular role they
play in the effective lives of the agents who
holds all those judgments and live by them. For
example, in terms of the whatever uh effective benefits
uh holding those judgments might have for them, uh
the benefits, for example, in uh fulfilling certain effective
needs they may have.
And of course, uh Nietzsche in his philosophy talks
a lot about one particular kind of effect that
he names re Sanima. So what is the role
that uh Reima plays in the way he understands
morality?
Well, so, yeah, so the, the, the concept of
reima plays a very prominent role in the gender
of m niche. Doesn't DJ doesn't talk much about
it before he writes that book. Uh But the,
the, the concept itself is probably present because he,
he clearly seems it's, it's a bit mysterious exactly
how these two things relate. But uh clearly thinks
that uh Reiman is connected to what he calls
revengeful. That root is the motivational state that the
emotional state that motivates revenge. And he talks about
revengeful, you know, from his earlier works on uh
but he introduces the concept of anti specifically in
the gender of morality. And it's been a bit
of a uh it's an ongoing question exactly what
he means by this. So the concept of reti
is a French word uh that Nietzsche uses deliberately
because uh there are German terms that are in
the vicinity of uh what roti means. Like the
word grow for example. But I think, and my,
my German native German friends uh tell me so
that it does quite capture the meaning of what
in English we call resentment. So remo is the
French word that translates the English resentment. Now, the
problem with claiming that niche when he talks about
reso has in mind, what we in English mean,
resentment is that in English, uh resentment is taken
on a very strong moral connotation. So resentment is
uh your response to the fact that you have
been wronged to the fact that you're the victim
of an injustice, for example. But it can be
what Nietzsche has in mind precisely because he takes
the effect of remo to explain why we came
up with more values and more judgments in the
first place. So it cannot be reso resentment because
resentment presupposes that we already have those beliefs and
values. Um So my rough sense is that resent
more uh captures what we in English means resentment.
But what we sometimes mean by resentment when we
think of it as a non moral emotion. So
John Stuart Mill for example, distinguishes between what he
calls more resentment, which is resentment when it is
a response to injustice or wrong from natural resentment,
which he associates, for example, with revenge. Now, he
doesn't say much about what it is. And one
of the questions for me in the book was
to try to understand uh you know what, what
riot is about what it is responsive to why
it motivates revenge and so on and so forth.
And so the basic idea is that uh resent
him for it is linked to uh what he
calls the will to power. When you understand the
will to power as a kind of psychological state,
a motivational state, you know, like a desire or
an inclination or a drive towards power. But where
power is to be understood in very specific ways,
or it's not to be understood in the way
in which it's usually understood. I mean, when you
think about power, you think about control, you think
about dominance and things of that nature. Uh But
what Nietzsche means by power is uh is, is
more specific than that. The reason is that control
and dominance are things that typically you don't want
for their own sake. There are things that you
want for the sake of what they allow you
to do. So uh my having control over a
piece of territory over the people, you know, allow
me to make sure that they do my bidding
uh Same with dominance. But Nietzsche clearly seems to
think that power is something that we want for
its own sake. Something that's the object of an
intrinsic desire to use that terminology. And so what
you need is an understanding of power that makes
it intelligible that this is something that you would
want for its own sake. And so the idea
that I have and it, it draws on some
of the metaphors that Nietzsche uses in his discussion
of power. Uh IS that power is the fact
of having your presence in the world make a
causal difference in it. It's the idea of making
your mark on the world or making the world
reflect uh reflect your presence in it where your
presence in it is your presence under a specific
description. So for example, in the case of human
beings, your presence as an agent with a will,
particular values, particular aspirations and so on and so
forth.
So at a certain point there you mentioned revengeful.
So and Nietzsche in his book talks about Christianity
or Christian morality as an act of revenge. What
does that mean? Exactly?
Ah, that's the 65,000 $64,000 question. Uh uh That's,
that's really the, I mean, the most arresting claim
of the book. I mean, that Christian morality, the
invention of Christian morality is an act of revenge
and it's puzzling in all kinds of ways, right?
It's puzzling in the first instance because when you
think about revenge in the paradigmatic cases, you think
about my wanting to make somebody suffer because they
have made me suffer, you know, uh think about
revenge as violent retaliation of some kind. But, but
the invention of Christian morality is, is not a
violent retaliation. It's uh it's basically the devising of
a new moral outlook. So, so it's very hard
to say to begin with how this, the invention
of certain values could count as revenge in the
first place. So, so that already shows that when,
when he thinks about revenge. Niche must have a
fairly capacious understanding of it. And in fact, if
you start scoring his works for uh uh for
instances in which he uses the concept of revenge,
you realize that he, he he he takes the
concept of revenge uh to have a very broad
meaning. So for example, acts of gratitude can be
acts of revenge for him. Acts of forgiveness. Christian
forgiveness. He describes explicit ingen, it can be an
act of revenge. Acts of beneficence can be acts
of revenge. And then he also argues that you
can take revenge, not just against other people, but
you can take revenge against impersonal entities like life.
So in the third essay of the genealogy, he
says that the invention of asceticism was an act
of revenge against life. You can revenge against time,
you can take revenge against reality for NC. So,
so it's very, very puzzling, right? So my, my
thought here, my driving thought and by the way,
I'm writing a new book about revenge just in
order to clarify those issues at the moment. But
my driving thought is that so Simon is the
response that you have when uh uh your, your
power, the sense that your presence in the world
is, doesn't make a difference in it or doesn't
make the difference that you expect uh is, is,
is challenged. It's called into question, it's called into
doubt. OK. So resentment is so to speak. Uh
uh A fight response against doubts raised about your
power. So for example, when somebody treats you as
if you're nothing, when they make you suffer, they,
they, they, they disregard your will and so on
and so forth. That's a paradigmatic instance in which
uh you're liable to feel or to be made
to feel impotent. And one of the response that
you can have of course is shame, which is
when you withdraw, when you, when you uh when
you submit, when you comply or you can have,
which is a flight response or you can have
a fight response, which is to respond and to
try to assert your power, for example, by making
suffer, the person who has made you suffer by
imposing your will upon theirs after they have imposed
their will upon yours. OK. So, so revenge uh
is the act whereby you attempt to restore your
power in that sense? OK. So the question is,
well, how could the invention of new values constitute
an act of revenge for the right? Well, so
the idea is this right? There are, there are
two elements to power, right? So, so power is
you want your presence in the world to make
a difference in it? But the second element is
that you want your presence in the world under
a certain description. OK. So what I am is
an agent with a certain kind of will with
my my will. In this case, for niche is
the repository of my values, my aspiration, what I
consider to be important. So what it is for
me to have power or to feel as though
I have power is that I am able to
make it so that the world around me reflect
my presence in it. For example, by realizing my
values, you know, and I'm liable to feel as
though I am important. If my will, my values
and my pursuit of them, my agency make no
difference in that world. So the idea is that
our Christianity for each or at least Christian morality
is an act of revenge for people whose will
has made no difference in the world. But they,
but they, they realize that they have no option
in order to be, become able to make a
difference in the world other than by altering the
contents of their will by altering the description under
which they want to make a difference in the
world. Ok? So the idea is that, well, look,
if you can't bend the world to your will,
maybe you can change your will so that whatever
it is that you can do will count as
bending the world to your will. So changing your
values is like changing what is going to count
as power for you. Ok? And in this case,
if the motivation is to restore your feeling of
power, to make it the case again, that you
can feel as though your presence in the world
makes a difference in it. Then the invention of
Christian morality is an act of revenge.
And so what would be the goals of revenge
in Christian morality? Does it have any specific goals
or not?
Well, ok, so, so a big question when you
think about revenge in general is precisely the question
of what the goal of revenge is, right? I
mean, so again, the paradigmatic instance is that you
caused me to suffer and my revenge, my retaliation
is to make you suffer because you made me
suffer. And then the question is well, but what
do I get out of this? Ok. So you
made me suffer and I made you suffer in
return, I retaliate. What's the purpose of my retaliation?
What do I accomplish with that retaliation? What do
I achieve or what is my aim in retaliating?
What am I trying to achieve when I retaliate?
So that's a, that's a difficult question. And for
this has that question I think has motivated are
the view that many philosophers take up to this
day, which consists in treating revenge as a kind
of punishment. So, so revenge is basically punishment. But
in circumstances where there are no institutions of justice
capable of meeting out the punishment so that the
individual him or herself has, as we say, to
take the law into his own hands or into
her own hands. OK. So revenge in this way
to use Francis Bacon's famous phrase is wild justice.
It's justice, it aims at justice but in conditions
in wild conditions or conditions of wilderness. Ok. So
you know, uh the American Western movies, for example,
is, you know, is almost always about revenge. But
in this case, you can say that it's revenge.
It's wild that this revenge is wild justice because
what they try to, to achieve is justice. But
under conditions of wilderness where there are no institutions,
there's no effective police institution, there's no system of
justice and the individual has to then you know,
be the judge and the executioner him or herself.
Um Now again, if revenge aimed at justice for
Nietzsche, then it would Presuppose the morality that he
thinks is created by revenge. So Nietzsche must have
an understanding of revenge, which is not moral or
not moralized in that way. And in fact, there
are some philosophers uh who have argued that revenge
does not aim at justice that uh if you,
if you make me suffer, uh when I take
revenge, I don't come true. You're making me suffer
as a wrong or as an injustice. And then
my retaliation would be a form of punishment. Something
else is going on. But then that's the mystery.
What else is going on if when I retaliate
against you for having made me suffer, I'm not,
my aim is not to punish you. My aim
is not for example, to deter you from doing
something wrong. My aim is not to make sure
you don't get away with it, that you get
what you deserve. My aim must be something else.
And the question is, well, what is the aim
of revenge? And my, my idea is that the
aim of revenge again is, you know, power in
the specific sense in which I understand it. It's
to uh restoring yourself the sense that your presence
in the world makes a difference in it. And
the idea, the reason why this is not more
is because this, this need for power is a
very fundamental, very basic psychological need uh which is
connected in my view, I mean, II, I can
try to explain this to you but uh uh
but it's connected with uh the importance uh of
um it's connected with our, our feeling of existence,
our sense that we are, as we say in,
I agree, we are somebody, you know, some people
feel like I'm a nobody. And what it usually
means is that when they feel like they are
nobodies, it is because they feel that their presence
in the world makes no difference in it. They
don't accomplish anything, they are done, they go unnoticed,
they are invisible to others and so on and
so forth. And sometimes in those circumstances, they will
react revengefully, they will want to do something that
changes their sense of themselves as nobody is. They
will make them feel like they are somebody Uh
So I think that the aim of revenge when
it's considered, you know, uh a non moral impulse
is this, it's what Nietzsche calls power.
So earlier, we've talked about uh functionality. Would you
say that, uh Christian morality or the Christian moral
outlook is itself functional?
Well, yes. So the, the, the function, so reti
is an effective state, you know, remember that niche
claims, I mean, the, the, the sort of the,
the view of moral belief or morality or moral
judgment that uh uh that underlies niches project in
the genealogy. Is this idea that moralities are sign
language of effects that mm more judgments or, or
systems of moral judgments. Uh Excuse me, my, my,
my dog is making some noise there. I don't
know, no worries. No, no, no, no. Uh So
moralities and moral judgments are, are, you know, um
uh not expressions of effects but they are, they
are uh they are causally related to those effects
underlying Nietzsche's approach to Christian morality in the, in
the g of Mor is the idea that uh
uh more judgments, more beliefs, more concepts uh have
a certain kind of uh functional role to play
in the effective emotional economy of agents. OK. So
uh you know, my holding a certain belief like
helping the needy is good or my holding a
certain conception of what justice is and so on
and so forth. All of these things are, are,
can be, can be understood as being in some
sense designed to play a certain kind of role
in my emotional economy uh to, to uh satisfy
certain emotional needs. Now, the question is, well, what
is the emotional need that's being satisfied by uh
by Christian morality? And according to Nietzsche, the emotional
need that's being satisfied is the emotional need that's
expressed uh or enshrined in the effect of resentment.
It's the need to feel as though your presence
in the world makes a difference in it. And
again, your presence in the world un under a
certain description. OK. So uh and there are various
ways in which it does that, right? So uh
so one of the, the chief uh characteristics of
Christian morality, this notion that every single human being,
regardless of origin, regardless of uh circumstance, it has
more status and as such is entitled to uh
to respect and consideration. Uh And that's a way
in which uh uh so if you, if you
believe that, then it dispenses you in order to
uh to feel as though your presence in the
world can make a difference and it dispenses you
from having to do anything. OK? Because because you're
entitled to the, the kind of respect and recognition
or notice from others uh in virtue of being
who you are not in virtue of your being
able to do something. So if you live in
a, in a culture where where your status is
linked to your, for example, achievement such as for
example, the honor cultures of Ancient Rome, where your,
your, your, your excuse me, your um uh your
immoral status, your honor was linked to your political
and martial prowess. For example, then in order to
in order to have your presence in the world,
make a difference in it. In order to have
to enjoy notice and recognition, you have to do
certain things. But of course, if you're not capable,
if you don't have the capacities, for example, to
uh handle weapons, to be good at fighting and
so on and so forth, then you risk, you
know, being a nobody literally. So one of the
ways in which you can begin to change this,
it's not sufficient, but one of the ways in
which you can begin to change this is by
changing values and by changing what's counts as worthy
of recognition, for example.
Mhm uh And so could you tell us now
about uh the concepts of slave morality and master
morality as Nietzsche understood them and as Nietzsche used
them and uh how do they apply to an
understanding of Christian morality from his own perspective?
Yeah. So uh so again, those concepts are very
loose in niche and they are, they connect to
various things. I think that the, the dominant our
strain uh in distinguishing between these two more outlooks
for has to do with the concept of equality.
So he famously describes our master moralities as those
moralities in which as he puts it, there's a
difference in value between human being and human being.
Not everybody is equal, not everybody is the same.
Some people deserve more consideration, more recognition, more notice
than others. Uh Or some people are entitled to
certain privileges to which others are not. Ok. So
uh what he clearly is referring to is, well,
I mean, I'm, I'm no historian of morality, but
I, I would imagine that many, many uh moral
outlooks prior to Christianity were probably in egalitarian moral
outlooks were uh for example, slavery was widespread, slavery
was completely normal. And of course, if you, if
you think that some people can be the slaves
of the people, you don't think that every, every
human being by virtue of being a human being
has equal worth. OK. So the, the big innovation
of Christian morality for niche is precisely this idea
that of equality, the idea that all human beings
are, are equal, uh equal worth, basic, equal worth,
which entitles them to respect and consideration, maybe passion
and so on and so forth. Uh And that
goes straight back to the idea that every human
being is a child of God and as such,
uh you know, deserves a kind as a kind
of standing. So that's, I think that's, that's the
crucial thing there. If, if you look closely, there
are uh other uh you know, distinctions that you
can draw. So for example, uh I sometimes suspect
that uh the distinction between a master morality, outlook
and a slave morality outlook is the distinction that
we draw today or that sociologist draw today between
what's called a, an honor culture and a dignity
culture. Uh We, and you know, sometimes honor cultures
are hierarchical cultures. There are egalitarian cultures and whereas
dignity, cultures are egalitarian cultures, but there's other distinctions
between honor and dignity, for example, uh dignity, cultures
are cultures in which uh you don't have to
do anything in order to be uh to have
status or standing and to deserve a certain kind
of to have certain rights and certain prerogatives. Whereas
in honor cultures, you have to do something, you
know. So, so honor, unlike dignity is something that
can be lost uh dignity. I mean, you can
behave in any way you want, you can behave
in an undignified manner. It's not going to change
the fact that you have dignity simply by virtue
of being a person. But if you behave dishonorably,
you lose your honor. So there are other distinctions
like that that might operate in the background of
what Nietzsche has in mind. But it's, it's, it's
not easy to tell. So
where do the ideas of good and evil come
from according to Nietzsche?
Well, so, so there was um you know, there
is a distinction between good and bad that predates
the invention of Christian morality, right? So in uh
in master moralities, you know, the to be good
is to be like the master and to be
bad is to be like, you know, everybody else
who's not a master. Uh So what's distinctive about
Christian morality is the the switch from that conceptual
pairing, good, bad to good evil. So actually the
question is what, what, what exactly is the difference?
Well, the one chief difference, uh there, there are
several but one chief difference I think has to
do with the importance in the application of the
concept of moral evil, of the idea of a
free will. So uh bad in the context of
Christian morality, uh simply refers to uh what's uh
you know, vile, what's ignoble, what's, you know, uh
low and so on and so forth and uh
you know, whether you vile, whether you ignoble is
unrelated to whether or not you are acting freely,
for example, OK. Uh BY contrast, uh when you
describe at least in a strict sense, when you
describe uh an action as morally evil, it is
essential that uh you suppose that the person who
perpetrated that action did so freely, uh because if
they are not, if the action was an accident,
then it may be evil in some sense, it
may be because it had bad consequences for example,
but it's not morally evil. OK. It's only if
you did something uh that is morally wrong on
purpose deliberately, intentionally, if you did it freely, uh
that you can be uh and therefore that you
can be held responsible for it, that the action
counts as morally evil. So that's one important uh
uh distinction, that niche. It was, it was also
these a lot Murkier distinctions between uh uh between
good, bad and good evil. And so, for example,
one of the things that he says is that
the pair good evil, unlike the pair good, bad
begins with uh uh an act of negation, be,
be begins with the invention of evil. So it's
as if you, you first describe some people or
some types of action as evil and then as
an afterthought, what's not like that you characterize as
good. Whereas in so called master moralities, you start
out by asserting something as good and then there's
an afterthought, what's not like that is bad. Uh
Exactly what Nietzsche means by this and he makes
a bit of a big deal out of this
way of carving the distinction in, in the genealogy
is, is a bit unclear. I have some thoughts
about this in the book, but I'm, I'm not
absolutely certain that I have quite understood. Are there's
something interesting going on there, but it's uh again,
I, you know, I'm not there, there are various
ways in which you can understand it
fair enough. Uh And what would you say is
the role that things like guilt and punishment play?
Uh In Nietzsche's account of the genealogy of morality
and perhaps more specifically in Christian morality.
Well, that, that's a, that's a complicated business. Uh
So, uh the genealogy of morality has, is divided
into three essays in the first essay, this is
where he talks most about resentment and the invention
of good and evil, uh, and things of that
nature. And then in the second and the third
essay, the notions of guilt and punishment figure prominently.
I mean, even in the third essay, which is
ostensibly about the invention of ascetic ideals there, he
says that the central acidic practice consists in interpreting
all of your suffering as he puts it under
the perspective of guilt. It is, it's consistent seeing
every, every piece of misfortunes that befalls you every
suffering you have to endure, you have to interpret
it as as punishment for your sins, so to
speak. So, so basically, the third essay really draws
very heavily on what he does on the second
essay. So the two essays together form a kind
of a conceptual whole there. So what's the importance
of all of this? Well, that's, that's our, that
took me some time to try to figure out,
right? So one thought uh that I pursued here
is that uh the concept of guilt and the
concept of responsibility that's tied up to it, maybe
understood uh are in the context of this, the,
the, the attempt to try to satisfy your need
for power. Uh The, the sense that you have
effectiveness as an agent in sort of uh uh
living and making the word reflect your values or
your aspirations. Uh And so the idea is this
right? Uh The idea is that if you do
something that falls short of your values, oh, you
could feel ashamed. But if you feel ashamed, uh
one, I mean, the concept of shame is a
notoriously difficult concept, but one way to distinguish between
shame and guilt is this right when you feel
ashamed because you have failed to live up to
your own values. Uh Usually what that means is
that you tried but you, you, you didn't have
what it takes. So your agency lacked effectiveness, you
lacked power in that sense and that's very, very
difficult to accept. Whereas if you feel simply guilty,
then uh it's true that you fail to live
up to your uh to your own values, you
fail to realize them in the way you live,
but you could have done otherwise you had the
power to do it. So in this way, feeling
guilty can be uh an a, a defense against
a much more emotionally damaging feeling of shame. Ok.
So, uh by uh inventing the concept of guilt
and then giving it very broad application, you can
see that Christian morality plays a role uh in
this or, or has the function of uh as
it were re restoring or buttressing the feeling of
power of people in whom that fee is, uh
is under threat. Um OK. So that's the first
thought, the, the second thought to come to the
question of punishment. Now, uh the second thought has
to do with which comes with a puzzle. So
the second essay uh is ostensibly devoted to a
genealogy of the feelings of guilt. But the problem
is that in the first essay, Nietzsche already has
given us, has given us a genealogy of guilt,
you know, by giving us a genealogy of uh
what are the norms of guilt? I mean, the
norms that you have to violate in order to
feel guilty and by giving us a genealogy of
freedom of will cause to feel guilty, you have
to feel as though you're responsible for violating certain
norms. No niche gives us uh in the first
essay, a genealogy of the freedom of will that
makes you responsible and the gene energy of the
norms, the violation of which would induce guilt. So
it seems like he has not already give us
the gene of guilt. So what is he doing
then? In the second essay, that's different from the
first. But in the second essay, what Nietzsche does
is that he pursues a very different line about
guilt. And the line that he pursues has to
do with the association that even we draw between
uh between guilt and indebtedness. So we, we talk,
for example, about uh being punished for our sins
as a way of paying our debts. So, so
there's a connection there which in German is actually
uh are very strong because the same word should,
can be translated as guilt and has indebtedness or
that in any event. Uh So he's very interested
in this connection. And the reason why he's interested
in the connection is because he's interested in a
particular way in which guilt and punishment can be
related. Uh So typically when we think of punishment,
I think we tend to think of it in
retributive terms. OK. So you did something wrong. I
punish you and my punishing you is retribution in
the sense that all I'm trying to do is
to get you what you deserve to make sure
you don't get away with it. That's it. But
if you think of punishment as retribution, it does
not undo the guilt. You know, it doesn't wash
away the guilt, so to speak. But, and this
is especially true Christianity. There's a way in which
punishment can wash away the guilt. And then the
question is, well, how could that be possible? But
if you think about guilt as indebtedness and you
think of punishment as an alternative way of paying
your debt, then you can see how punishment could
wash away the guilt. And this is the line
that Nietzsche explores in that, in that second essay,
you know, so, so sometimes you can fail to
live up to your own values. And of course,
that, you know, that shows that, you know, you,
you, you maybe you don't have what it takes
to live up to the values. It raises that
question. But if it turns out that you, you
can somehow demonstrate that you have the capacity to
live up to those values, for example, by undergoing
the kind of deprivation that living up to the
values requires of you in the form of punishment
or penance. Then it, it reassures you with regard
to your power. And I think that this is
the line that Nietzsche is pursuing.
So before we get into the will to nothingness
itself, that gives title to your book, let me
just ask you about another topic. So what are
Nietzsche's thoughts on aestheticism?
So, one of the striking features of Christian morality
and even the secular variants of Christian morality that
were developed in the enlightenment and they're a roughly
defined moral look with which we at least in
the Western world live these days. Uh IS that
to act morally, is not necessarily good for you.
OK? To act morally. Uh You may have to
uh to do things that are not in your
best interest, you may have to do to uh
undergo uh or you may have to do things
that are going to harm you that are going
to be bad for you in that sense. Uh
That's uh it's a new idea. I mean, for
the Ancient Greeks, for example, it's very striking that
uh the reasons to act in ways that they
consider more to act virtuously is that it's good
for you? Ok. So in Aristotle and virtue, ethics
is like that, you know, why should I, you
know, uh, be good to my friends, for example,
why should I treat other people with, in, in
the ways that I'm, you know, that the morality
requires me to treat them, not because it's good
for you. That's, that's, that's the answer. Ok? But
it's not the case in uh uh in modern
morality, in modern morality, you know, morality requires me
to do things that are going to go against,
against my interests that are going to be bad
for me. And Nietzsche finds the origin of this
in, in Christian morality. Ok. Now, so there's a,
a kind of a building asceticism in the modern
moral outlook that grew out of Christian morality. Now,
of course, in the modern moral outlook that, that
uh asceticism is fairly attenuated. I mean, the modern
morality doesn't say, look, you should, you should give
up on your happiness, you should go against what's
good for you. You should go against your well
being, uh uh if you want in order to
be more, no, it says that no, you can,
you can pursue your well being, you can pursue
your happiness, but only within the limits that are
placed upon it, upon that pursuit by morality. So
there's going, there might be occasions in your life
where you have to choose between what's good for
you and what's morally. Right? Ok. So that can
happen. That's the way, that's the extent of the
asceticism. Uh, IN modern morality. Ok. There might be
circum, I mean, of course, in extreme circumstances, it
may mean your death. I mean, sometimes morality requires
you to sacrifice yourself, not, not just your being,
but your life for a moral cause of some
kind. All right. Now, there are many examples like
this. But in Christian morality, the asceticism is not
so attenuated. Ok? In Christian morality, you're being told
that what it is to be more, what it
is to be good is just is to turn
your back on your prosperity, your well being, your
flourishing, at least as a member of the natural
world. OK. So what it is for me to
be moral in the terms of Christian morality as
Nietzsche understands it is to turn my back on
the, on the natural world completely and on myself
as a member of the natural world. So I
have to give up uh uh on what he
calls in the genealogy uh physiological, which is another
way in uh in German to say natural well
being. Uh So my well being is an embodied
uh individual with the kinds of uh needs, including
psychological and emotional needs that are characteristic of an
embodied being. I have to turn my back on
all of this. Uh That's what asceticism is? That's
the kind of asceticism that Nietzsche targets in the
toy of the genealogy.
So, getting into the final topic of our conversation
today, what is then the will to nothingness and
where does it stem from?
Well, so we will do nothing less. Uh, IS
a, is a phrase that Nietzsche introduces in the
final essay of the genealogy. He mentions it in
the first section of the essay and then in
the final concluding section of the essay where, and
he says in both cases that uh uh it's
better to will, nothing less than not to will
at all. And so clearly, what he has in
mind is the role that uh the endorsement of
Christian morality can play in uh warning off against
nihilism where Nihilism is the condition of not willing,
where uh the what motivates not willing is uh
is the fact that it seems pointless to you
to will anything you go. And it can be
pointless either because you can identify nothing worth willing
or even if you can identify something worth willing.
As I argued in my first book, if you
don't have what it takes to achieve what's worth
willing, then what's the point of willing it anyway,
if you can, if you can get there. And
so he, he, he thinks that uh Christian morality,
you know, is one of the functions of Christian
morality is to stave off that kind of uh
nihilistic. What he calls suicidal nihilism. So, to that
extent, Christian morality is an instrument of self preservation.
But Christian morality does that in a way that's
going to prove to be very costly. So it's
trying to stave off nihilism. But in a way
that eventually, you know, uh uh fails is self
defeating in that way. And that's why I think
he calls it a will to nothingness. So I,
I don't think that what he means is that,
you know, the Christians want nothing less as, as
such, but what they want the way in which
they go about willing ends up being a will
to nothing that because it's a way of willing,
it's a way of engaging in your life that
turns out to uh that, that gives set yourself
a kind of an objective that uh but does
so in a way that proves to be self
defeating in the, in the end of the day,
that's why it ends in nothing that anyway, you
try to, to keep nothing that away, but in
a way that makes it unavoidable for you.
So is this will to nothingness, a moral outlook
itself or not?
Well, it's, it's uh so to say that uh
Christian, the Christian moral outlook uh is expresses a
will to nothingness is basically the central critical claim
that Nietzsche makes, right? So the, the Christian moral
outlook as a certain function, but the way in
which it fulfills that function proves to be self
defeating or self undermining. Uh So the function is
broadly speaking, uh to restore their feeling of power
to people whose, in, in whom the whose weakness
has exposed them to it. But it does. So
in a way that uh by depleting our, the
strength of that individual makes them in the long
run, are unable to uh to maintain that feeling
of power, makes them unable to do the kinds
of things that would make it the case, that
their presence in the world makes a difference in
it. Uh Which is why I argue that uh
you know, especially this is especially true of the
asceticism that Nietzsche advocates that this asceticism turns out
to be a pyrrhic victory. Because uh you know,
if you uh uh if, if you believe that
you can achieve natural well being, then repudiating national
well uh natural well being is claiming that it
has no value makes you uh has the benefit
that you don't have to feel like you are
impotent or incompetent for your failure to achieve that
kind of well being. But then the problem is
that if you want to subscribe, continue subscribing to
the acidic ideal, you have to deprive yourself in
ways that are going to weaken you even further.
Which is why Nietzsche says that the Christian morality,
Christian asceticism in particular addresses a sickness, the sickness
that's caused by the weakness that makes it very
difficult for you to uh to make it the
case that your presence in the world makes a
difference in it. It addresses that weakness, it addresses
only the symptoms of the weakness, not the cold,
the cause being the weakness. And in fact, what
it does is that it, it further it, it,
it, it exacerbates the weakness instead of eliminating it,
ensuring that in the long run, you will find
yourself completely incapable of making it the case that
your presence in the world makes a difference. So,
so I used the uh so I used two
analogies that might be helpful here. One is uh
uh the analogy of a Pyrrhic victory. So ps
was this famous uh general who won uh victories,
but at great cost to his army. So it
was a victory, all right, he defeated the opposite
army, but he came out of that defeat, having
no army himself. So, so that if he were
to face another threat again, he would be unable
to meet it. Uh So if for a moment
manages to do what he needs to do, to
establish security, to establish his power. But at the
cost of being able to do it, you know,
uh in the long run. So that's why it's
a process that's ultimately self undermining the other analogy
that I use, uh which is quite a, a
uh applicable actually is an analogy with a uh
a particular way of understanding the phenomenon of anorexia
uh by uh at least in, in certain strains
of psychoanalytic theory. So the anorexic gives up on
the desire for food. They claim that feeding myself
is not important. And it turns out that the
motivation very often it has to do with power
and independence. You know. So there are going to
be cases where the anorexic refuses to eat because
for example, there caregivers use the, the act of
feeding them as an opportunity for them, The caregivers
to demonstrate to the, to the anorexic him or
herself uh that they have power over them that
they are that the anorexic is dependent on them
and so on and so forth. So that uh
the anorexic might decide that well, if I want
to, to assert my power and my independence, I
have to give up on the desires that make
me dependent, that make me more or less. And
so you can see how in some sense they
do by uh disa avoiding those desires or by
devaluing those desires, they do achieve a measure of
power and independence, but you can also see what
the cost is for it.
Great. So uh the book is again, the Will
To Nothingness, an essay on niches on the genealogy
of morality. I'm leaving a link to it in
the description box of this interview. And Doctor Regin,
would you like to tell people where they can
find you and your work on the internet?
Well, I mean, the best place to to go
uh such as it is, is probably the website
uh of uh the philosophy department at Broad University
where I have a research page uh which is
always in need of, of updating and improvement. But
I hope to be able to do this sometimes
over the course of the summer.
Ok, great. So thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
always a pleasure to talk to you.
The pleasure has been all mine, Ricardo. Thank you
so much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please do not
forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe. And
if you like more generally, what I'm doing, please
consider support the show on Patreon or paypal. You
have all of the links in the description of
this interview. This show is brought to you by
En lights learning and development done differently. Check their
website at alights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters per Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunda
Bernards, all of election and Weser, Adam Castle Matthew
Whitten Whitting Bear. No wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric, Alania,
John Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly, Robert Winde in Nai
Zoup, Mark Nevs Colin Hall, Simon Columbus, Phil Cavanagh,
Mikel Stormer, Samuel Andrea Francis for the Agd Alexander
Dan Bauer, Fergal, Ken Hall, Herzog, Michel, Jonathan Libra
Jin and the Samuel Correa Eric Hines, Mark. Smith
Jan We Amal S Franz David Sloan Wilson Yasa,
Des Romaine Roach, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bliss, Nicole
Barbar and Pao Ay Nele Guy Madison Gary G
Haman, Samo Zal Arien Y Nick Golden Paul Talent
in John Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall. Eden
Brown, Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lotti Gabriel Pan Cortez,
Lalit Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John
Wiesman, Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul George
Arnold Luke Lo A George the Off Chris Williamson,
Peter Lawson, David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson, Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw and Murray Martinez. Le Chevalier, Bangalore
atheists, Larry Daley, Junior, Holt Eric B. Starry Michael
Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD,
Ior Jeff mcmahon Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell
Richard Bowen Thomas the Dubner, Luke Ni Andre Story,
Manuel Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A special
thanks to my producers. This is our web gem
Frank Luca Stan, Tom Weam Bernard Eni Ortiz Dixon
Benedict Mueller Vege Gli Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al Nick
Ortiz. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Serge
Adrian and Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.